# Examining Changes and Relationships between Clouds, Precipitation, and Precipitable Water in the African Monsoon Region
# Austin Reed
# Introduction
My dataset of choice is ERA5 monthly averaged data on single levels from 1979 to present, which is the fifth generation ECMWF renalysis for the global climate and weather for the past 4 to 7 decades. I plan to look at the variables of total cloud cover, total precipitation, column cloud liquid water, as well as total column cloud water vapor in Africa to answer the question: Has mean precipitable water changed significantly in the African monsoon region over the last 70 years? In which season? And how is that change related to changes in clouds? Some tools that I could use to help solve this question include looking at monthly, and seasonal anomalies over continental Africa, and explore the variance in these anomalies over recent years. This can help to pinpoint statistically significant trends in precipitation, total column precipitable water, cloud cover, and total column liquid water over continental Africa. The continent can be further broken up into sub-regions to highlight the impact of the African monsoon. 

(Include some citations from papers, etc)
# Data
The datasets used in my project are:
### ERA 5 Monthly Mean Data on Single Levels, from 1979-present
Replacing the ERA-interim reanalysis, ERA5 is the fifth generation ECMWF reanalysis for the global climate and weather for the past 4 to 7 decades. Using data from 1979 onwards, ERA5 provides monthly estimates for a large number of atmospheric, ocean-wave, and land-surface quantities. Data has been regridded to a regular lat-lon grid of 0.25 degrees for the reanalysis and 0.5 degrees for the uncertainty estimate. 
Variables utilized are 'total precipitation', the sum of large scale and convective precipitation that is the accumulated liquid and frozen water, comprising rain and snow, that falls to the Earth's surface, with 1 day accumulation period for monthly averaged reanalysis. Units are meters. 'Total cloud cover' is also used as a dimensionless quantity that varies from 0 to 1, being the proportion of a grid box covered by cloud. 'Total column water vapor', more commonly called precipitable water, is also utilized, defined as the total amount of water vapor in a colun extending from the surface of the Earth to the top of the atmosphere. This is measured in kgm^-2. A land-sea mask, a dimensionless quantity, that represents the proportion of land, as opposed to ocean or inland waters in a grid box, is also utilized. Values above 0.5 can be comprised of a mixture of land and inland water, but not ocean. 
### Atlantic Meridioal Oscillation (AMO) Index
Monthly means of the detrended AMO index, from 1979-2020 are utilized to calculate composites for positive and negative AMO events with total precipitation over the African monsoon land region. This is further explored for the Sahel region, where worldwide SST anomalies are found to modulate summer Sahel rainfall.
# Results and Analysis
### Project Notebook via Github
Located within my CLIM680_project repository is a series of jupyter notebooks that contain all of the labeled and commented code that was used in my analysis. 
[Link:](https://github.com/areed29/CLIM680_project/) 
Each topic will be discussed, along with a link to each relevant notebook. 
### Conda Environment 
The environment.yml file is shown to define the environment needed to run all code successfully. 
### Function creation
A function was created to calculate climatologies and anomalies, labeled as ___ in each jupyter notebook. This is in addition to the clim680 function generated in class to calculate xyticks.
[Link to function](https://github.com/areed29/CLIM680_project/blob/master/clim680_function.py)
### Figures
The figures from my project notebook are saved in a seperate 'figures' subdirectory, as well as shown in the project notebook.
[Link to figures](https://github.com/areed29/CLIM680_project/tree/master/figures)
### Climatology and Anomalies 
A panel plot of the climatology of monthly averaged precipitation (in meters), monthly averaged cloud cover, and monthly averaged precipitable water was plotted for each month, in order to observe differences in the monthly/seasonal cycle, and spatial variability. The largest amount of cloud cover is located around 0-20S in DJF, gradually shifting north by MAM, and then furthest north in a band between 5S-15N by the JJA rainy season. Precipitable water shows similar patterns, with highest values concentrated near the Gulf of Ginuea. The precipitation climatology also shows this northward shift in the rainy season.

[Jupyter notebook link](https://github.com/areed29/CLIM680_project/blob/master/Africamonthlyclimo_assignment2.ipynb)
### Subsetting: Exploring Climatology/Anomalies for Sahel region
For the Sahel lat/lon point of 15N,10E, the climatology was compared with data for the starting and ending years of the dataset (1979 and 2020) for each variable. For precipitation and precipitable water, the peak in climatology comes during the midst of the rainy season during the months of JJA. Cloud cover is the most variable over each month, still peaking on average in the rainy season. The anomaly space is then visualized for each of the 3 variables for the Sahel grid point, with a best-fit trend line superimposed over each time series. The most significant trend is for cloud cover anomalies over the Sahel region, with a trend of 0.03 (fraction/month).

[Jupyter notebook link](https://github.com/areed29/CLIM680_project/blob/master/Sahel_climo_anoms.ipynb)
### Composites and mean differences with AMO
Next, composite analysis is performed on continetal Africa precipitation anomalies with the detrended AMO index. Warm and cold AMO events are respectively categorized as an SSTA (Sea Surface Temperature Anomaly) as being greater than or less than 0. For the precipitation data, the climatology and anomlaies were calculated exclusively for land data, masking out grid cells in the domain for the ocean. Precipitation anomalies were then normalized by the standard deviation, in order to reduce data redundancy and create unitless anomalies, which also makes comparison amongst variables easier. The precip anomalies were then selected according to if they matched a month containing a warm or cold AMO index, where a mean was then taken over the time dimension. Composite precipitation anomalies during warm and cold AMO events over continental Africa were plotted. The plot indicates that for warm AMO events, negative precipitation anomalies seem to be found from 5N-15S, with positive precipitation anomalies found in this region for cold AMO events. A plot of mean differences between warm AMO precip composites and cold AMO precip composites was plotted, with areas of statistical significance hatched off using the 95th confidence interval. The resulting plot indicates statistically significant areas of composite precipitation differences between warm AMO and cold AMO events found in inland Africa from 5N- ~15S. I plan to further investigate the composite between AMO events and precipitation anomalies looking specifically at the JJA rainy season. 

[Jupyter notebook link](https://github.com/areed29/CLIM680_project/blob/master/AMO_composite.ipynb)
### Correlation Analysis with AMO
For correlation analysis, correlation of each of the 3 variables (total cloud cover, total precipitation, and precipitable water) with the AMO index was investigated. After loading in the de-trended AMO index, precipitation data was selected to match the same amount of months as the AMO index. The dataset was once again masked to include only land values, with the resulting climatologies and anomalies calculated. Anomalies were once again normalzied by the standard deviation of each variable. A grid point representing the Sahel region was then selected to analyze correlation between normalized precipitation anomalies with the detrended AMO index. The correlation coefficient was determined to be 0.14, so it was determined that these 2 variables have a very weak linear relationship. This will motivate the next part of my project, as I will seperate the data into seasons, where I suspect that these 2 variables will become much more correlated. For each of the 3 variables, correlation with the AMO index was then plotted over the entire domain of Africa. From 0-10S, there seems to be a negative correlation between clouds and the AMO index and precip and the AMO index, with a weak correlation found in the Sahel region. For precipitable water, there is a somewhat stronger positive correlation found with the AMO index in the region from 10N-35N. Areas of statistical significance were then hatched off, and it was determined that blah blah.

[Jupyter notebook link](https://github.com/areed29/CLIM680_project/blob/master/CorrelationAnalysis_AMO_precip.ipynb)
### Regression Analysis with AMO
For linear regression analysis, anomalies were once again calculated for each of the 3 variables, first applied without any masking or weighting. Next, the anomalies were once again normalized by each variable's standard deviation. Then, the masking over land and area-weighting was applied. Weighting over the domain was applied using the cosine of the latitude. Using these normalized, masked, and area-weighted anomalies, a linear regression was applied between each of the 3 variables, as well as each of the variables with the AMO index. First, the regression was applied between the cloud cover anomaly and precipitation anomaly time series. A slope of 0.36 and r-squared value of 0.4 was found as a result. For a linear regression between precipitation anomalies and precipitable water anomalies, a slope of 1.04 was found, with an r-squared value of 0.19. Between cloud cover and precipitable water, a slope of 0.82 was found, with an r-squred value of 0.36. When each of these variables were regressed with the AMO index, negative trends were found for both precipitation anomalies and total cloud cover anomalies, with slopes of -0.27 and -0.06 respectively. The only variable that had a positive trend when regressed with the AMO index was precipitable water, with a slope value of 0.13. A panel plot map of linear regression with each of the 3 variables (total cloud cover, total precipitation, and precipitable water) is then shown, with significant regression coefficients at the 95th significance level indicated by the hatchings. Based on this map, areas of significance of the negative slope between precipitation anomalies and the AMO Index are found in the rainforest/grassland region of Central Africa. Notably, as expected, an area of statistical significance is found in the positive trend area between precipitation anomalies and the AMO index in the Sahel region. If further broken into seasons, I hypothesize that this statistically significant positive trend area would be greatly enhanced for the JJA rainy season. The slope, p value and r value are then written to an xarray dataset and a seperate netcdf file.
[Jupyter notebook link](https://github.com/areed29/CLIM680_project/blob/master/Regression_Analysis_AMO_precip.ipynb)
# Summary
In summary, 

# References